Where is he, Jeremy?
Papa's been gone a long while, hasn't he?
Where can he be, sweetheart?
Where can he be?
(Woman calls out in French)
(Grunts)
Tiens!
(Shouting in French)
- Je suis innocent!
- Allez par lCl!
(Man shrieks)
- Je suis innocent!
THOLLY: Come on.
(Low chatter)
DEMELZ4:
He 7/ be game in
few days.
I pray for his return and dread it...
for while there's no news of Dwight...
There's still hope.
Yes, that he is still alive somewhere in France.
I couldn't bear for Ross to risk his life for nothing.
Doctor Enys be alive.
Old Prudie feel it in her bones.
Don't you worry about Ross.
He knows how to take care of himself.
In any case, 'tis only Roscoff.
Je ne suis pas un espion! Je le jure!
- (Grunts)
- Menteur!
(Grunts)
- "Quaint little market town"?
- So 'twas, young Cap'n,
when your father and I used to make the trip.
That was 20 years ago, before the Revolution.
- Let's hope that's not our man.
- Nay.
Jacques Clisson be a wily old cove.
He be laying low till the coast's clear.
- Whenever that may be.
- Directly, I swear.
Old Tholly ever let you down before? Hm?
Qu’ est-me que ’m regardes’?
Fils de chien.
(Bell tolls)
- Ma'am.
These people, you know them?
Of course, they're our tenants.
Francis always felt it was important
to be on good terms with them.
But, then, he'd grown up in the district.
- With an ancient family name.
- And no fences?
Reverend Odgers,
the west gate needs repairing.
Would you send the bill to my steward?
Most generous of you, sir.
We're unspeakably grateful.
..to the gospel feast
Let every soul be Jesus' guest
Ye need not one be left behind
For God hath bid all humankind
Sent by my Lord, on you I call
The invitation is to all
Come, all the world
Come, sinner, thou
All things in Christ are ready now
Laissez-moi, monsieur!
WOMAN: Monsieur! Monsieur!
- (Guard speaks French)
- Non!
BOY: Monsieur?
- (Blows thudding)
- (Woman sobs)
WOMAN: Monsieur! Monsieur!
(Woman sobs)
(Guard speaks French)
DEMELZA: News from Roscoff?
ZACKY: It's not good.
Revolution has hit it hard.
lnformati0n'll be difficult to find.
Ross'll need to bide a while.
(Sighs) Course he do.
When do anything go according to plan
with Ross?
You've heard the latest?
'Bout brother Sam?
Not being allowed in church,
his brethren have taken to singing outside.
Ye restless wanderers after rest
QEMELZ4; I said there’d soon he . .
more ,o/igr/ms WIthout the church than WIth/n.
It does sit uneasy with me,
this...show of defiance.
'Tis not like they do any harm.
They only praise the Lord in their own way.
In their own way, yes, which the church forbid.
But Odgers forbids them the church.
Where must they go?
DEMELZA: Ross don't want you worshipping
on his land, but would this not serve?
The old Grambler Meeting House.
'Twas gifted by Francis to the villagers.
SAM: What happened to it?
When George bought all the land hereabouts
and closed Grambler Mine,
the village did empty
and all about fell to disrepair.
He is a veritable John the Baptist.
You're not of the connection yourself?
My father was and grandfather afore him,
but I have more sense.
- (Chuckles)
- 'Tis not so very decayed.
It would take but a few good men
with timbers and nails.
Where's Drake when you need him?
GEOFFREY: Drake! Drake!
Come on, Drake.
GEORGE: Now I've become a magistrate,
I can begin to hunt a bigger prize.
I wish to become a burgess of the borough.
That would certainly advance
your influence in the district.
But our recent mine closures,
trade monopolies, land enclosures,
these have not endeared us to the vulgars.
_With events_ in France
making our patncnans nervous,
we should have a care
of how we're seen to treat our tenants.
A less heavy-handed approach.
A courting of public approval.
George Warleggan, man of the people.
(Chuckles)
Ross Poldark had better look to his crown.
SOLDIER: Tu es un espion royaliste.
Et tu viens avec nous!
MAN: Monsieur! Monsieur, s'il vous plait!
S'il vous plait! Non!
(Breaking wind)
(Both chuckle)
Windy, was it, on the beach today?
Oh, er... Why would you think so?
Hair, face, shoes.
You have to be sharp to out-trump me, boy.
(Laughter)
Did I hear you've been to Hendrawna Beach?
Well, why not, in such fine weather?
Sea air does wonders for the lungs.
Nevertheless, it's further than I'd wish you to go.
There are strong currents.
- We never go near when the tide is full.
- And it's unsafe to be so far from home.
There's unrest in the villages. The harvest
has failed. inevitably, there's discontent.
- Take your father's pistol.
- I'd prefer you not to go at all.
(Valentine cries)
As you wish, cousin.
He's not a bit like me, is he?
Much darker.
Mm.
Hey, John, over here!
(Chatter)
THOLLY: He's here.
ROSS: Monsieur Clisson.
(French accent) The prison at Quimper,
most of the prisoners are English.
Many are sick and wounded.
Any officers among them?
It's difficult.
The guards have orders to speak to no-one.
But there is one I know.
He tells me there are survivors of
a recent sea battle.
Could he provide names?
Possibly, for a price.
How much?
50...
...for him.
And 50 for me.
- When do you return?
- Beware, monsieur.
The Rpublique is watchful.
(Clears throat)
Tonight.
Do 'ee trust him?
No. But he's all we have.
CARY: Francis Poldark gifted
the old chapel near Grambler village.
He was always giving away property.
- No doubt that's why he was so popular.
- Mm.
We can have our attorney prepare
a formal deed of gift.
It can be our first act of benevolence
toward the vulgars.
Lately, a group of Methodists
have been repairing it.
_ - Methodists? _
- That was Its former use, as a meeting house.
Do you happen to know
the names of these Methodists?
No, sur.
As magistrate, I'm empowered to appoint
a constable for the district.
- You will be such a one.
- I, sur?
Your Trenwith duties will remain unchanged
but, in addition,
- you'll be deployed on certain public errands.
- If 'ee say so, sur.
What I say is that you will find me
the names of these Methodists.
Yes, sur.
And let us not be too hasty with our deed of gift.
It may not be needed after all.
(Groans)
'Tis like old times.
SOLDIER: Royalistes! Suive-moi!
Confess, young Captain,
do 'ee not long for those days?
- Thee, me and your father up to no good.
- I've had my fill of sailing close to the wind.
I have a wife, a child, another on the way.
I'll be keeping my head down
and my mouth shut.
(Yawns)
There are officers of the Army and Naw,
but it's not easy to get names.
It will cost more.
Hundred.
50 now, 50 when you bring me the names.
It will take time. Go home.
- I send you word...
- I am not leaving Roscoff until I have a list.
Then you must be on your guard.
Every hour you remain puts you in danger.
The Republique may turn a blind eye
to the trade, not to spies.
We are not spies.
You seek information concerning
prisoners of the Rpublique.
Some would call that spying.
WOMAN: Puis je vous aider?
MAN: Merci, mademoiselle.
(Signs)
Whatever happened to that beauty
you once set your heart on?
Chynoweth girl?
She married my cousin.
Harsh.
I survived.
I needed a wife who could chop wood and
skin rabbits as well as drink tea and curtsey.
Your father would have bedded his maid,
not wed her.
My father and I are not alike.
Hm.
And yet, here you are...
(Sighs) ..with old Tholly again...
...on another fool's errand.
(Tholly chuckles)
(Valentine gurgles)
(Cries)
GEORGE: Elizabeth?
My dear, I'm leaving shortly.
For what?
My first appearance on the bench.
- Perhaps you'd care to accompany me.
- Would I?
_ I seem to recall _
FranCIs found It all qurte tiresome.
No, I think my time is better spent here.
There are household matters to attend to.
Just as you like.
(Low chatter)
- God bless you.
- Thank you so much.
- Ennemi du peuple!
-(Shouﬁng)
Je suis innocente!
(Jeering)
(Shouﬁng)
(Shouting continues)
(Bell tolls)
(Shouﬁng)
(Jeering)
I, George Warleggan...
do swear that I truly and bona fide
have such an estate in law or equity,
to and for my own use and beneﬁt
as doth qua/i/j/ me to act
as a Justice of the Peace,
according to the true intent
and meaning of the Act.
(Cheering)
- Vive la Rpublique!
CROWD: Vive la Rpublique!
MA/V: l/ive /a Rpublique!
Vive la Rpublique!
CROWD: Vive /a Rpublique!
Oh, that's all we need.
She's had her eye on us since we arrived.
Vive la Rpublique.
As you say, mademoiselle.
You are here on business?
Importer of fine wines and spirits.
Can you prove it?
I have papers.
- About you?
- In my room.
Shall we go and inspect them?
(Chuckles) My apologies, mademoiselle,
I omitted to mention I'm married with a child.
- I'm not.
- Tholly.
- I'm ready, willing and able.
- Well, if he won't, I will.
- I must apologise for my servant, mademoiselle.
- S_ervant! _
- You're a stranger In these parts, monsreur.
And evidently not aware of
how useful it is to have friends...
...as opposed to enemies.
I humbly trust I've made none today.
WOMAN: Calvados.
(Background chatter in French)
CAROLINE: How frustrating is a woman's lot?
We're left idling at home
while the men go off and fight battles.
Is that we do? Idle?
Perhaps I've grown less bold since my marriage.
I seriously doubt that.
- I've been considering...
- Yes?
...how could I get news of Dwight?
Who do I know who has influence
and could use it on my behalf?
A pheasant is no small matter.
And the theft of such property from your betters
shows a disrespect for authority
which cannot go unpunished.
It now remains for me to pronounce on you
the awful sentence of the law
which is that you be tied to a post
in the market square and publicly flogged.
- (Courtroom hubbub)
- Twenty lashes.
- Next case!
- No!
-(Shouﬁng)
- (Woman sobs)
Please, madam. Steady on.
Your man sent this from Trenwith, sir.
Justice Warleggan.
Miss Penvenen,
were you here to see me do my duty?
- I thought I'd look in. Most impressive.
- Mm.
And may I suggest, quite as valuable
to our nation as those who fight our wars?
Of course, a man in your position
must be privy to all sorts of news about the war.
I know many of our acquaintances
would be grateful of news
of Doctor Enys, for instance.
I fear they would not.
What makes you so sure?
Dr Enys is not on any list of prisoners,
nor of survivors.
One must sadly assume the worst.
DRAKE: Mr Warleggan's taking it back?
SAM: Can he do that?
- Well, he own the land.
- It was gifted to the brethren by Mr Francis.
- Verbally gifted, nothing writ down.
- What harm could it do to let us use it?
DEMELZA: None at all.
But you've defied him,
so he means to put you in your place.
- So what's to be done?
- With Captain Ross not here to fight our corner.
'Tis in the Lord's hands now.
With respect, Sam,
sometimes the Lord do need a little help.
- But Cap'n Ross said, "On no account..."
- "Must you venture on Trenwith land"?
Well, Captain Ross ain't here now, so I say do it.
Elizabeth's there alone. 'Twas her late husband
Francis did make the gift to the brethren.
So she might have more sympathy
than Mr Warleggan?
Not if she sees me.
- Will you keep it civil, Zaclq?
- Easier said than done.
Clisson will meet us here on Sunday night.
He has definite information.
- What did I tell 'ee? Now we can rest easy.
WOMAN: Vous savez quoi faire.
- I suspect not.
- Will you come with us, monsieur?
Fils de pute! Laissez—le! Pour I'amour de Dieu,
c'est une marchande Anglais!
Qu'a-t'il fait de mal?
DRAKE: Remember what sister said.
No mention of our names nor relationship.
What be the cause of this ill will
between the two houses?
'Tisn't for me to say, boy, but 'tis powerful.
Master's not home.
'Tis the mistress we've come to see.
She know me by sight and name:
Zachariah Martin.
You two, follow me.
And you, wait here.
- Me? But...
- Mr Warleggan's orders.
No more than two riffraff in the house
at any one tIme.
(Clicks his tongue)
(Door opens)
(Door closes)
(Bird squawks)
- Drake? Drake! Is it really you?
- Ssh, Master Geoffrey.
I'm here with brother and Zacky Martin.
They've business with your mother, but
it will not be good for you to be seen with me.
Oh, what do I care about that?
Besides, these are actually my gardens,
or will be one day.
ROSS: I am not an enemy of France.
I am merely a businessman trying to conduct
a trade, which is to the benefit of France.
It is not to the benefit of France to permit spies
to come ashore and live among us.
I'm not a spy. Since arriving here, I have made
no attempt to venture beyond Roscoff,
nor to act contrary to the interests of France.
You went entirely against it by spending a night
on French soil without reporting to Gendarmerie.
My apologies, monsieur,
I had no idea there was such a requirement.
The penalty for a first of fence is imprisonment.
For a second: execution.
As this is a first of fence,
and committed without malice...
...perhaps you will permit me to pay a fine
in lieu of imprisonment?
Say, 20 guineas.
50.
(Coins jingling)
50. (Clears throat)
On the condition that
you leave Roscoff Immediately.
- My ship will not return until Monday night.
- The May Queen is leaving tonight.
You will board her without delay.
- Perhaps the offer of a further 50 guineas...
- Will lead to your immediate imprisonment
for attempting to suborn
an officer of the Rpublique.
If you are found ashore after midnight,
you will be executed.
SOLDIER: Avance.
So we thought,
since Mr Francis gifted land to the brethren...
- Are you quite sure he did that?
- Begging your pardon, ma'am,
I was there with my old father
when Mr Francis made the promise.
SAM: So we ask your kind help, ma'am.
For, in the saving of this house,
you'll be doing God's handiwork.
- Will I?
- And we shall pray for the saving of your soul.
Any help 'ee can give
would be much appreciated.
I should be getting back.
Brother and Mr Zaclq will be soon done.
_ - Oh.
- MISS Morwenna.
- Why are you here?
- I came with my brother.
He did speak with Mrs Warleggan.
Tell Drake, Morwenna.
Tell him he must visit
whenever Mama and Uncle George are away.
- Oh, I'm not sure...
- You'd like that. You know you would.
You're always talking about him.
_ _ _ IfI write a note
InVItIng you to the house, Will you come?
Oh, pardon my asking.
You can read?
Of course.
I... I think I must go.
Er, until the next time, Miss Morwenna.
I'll speak to Mr Warleggan when he returns
and explain that you viewed this promise
made by my late husband as a binding one.
Of course, I cannot guarantee he'll reconsider.
May the Lord ever guide 'ee
and teach 'ee to walk in His ways.
We'll take no more of your time.
- Good day to you both.
BOTH: Good day.
All in all, 'twas a good day's work.
FEMALE SELLER: Achetez mes oignons!
Allez!
What now?
We appear to be leaving.
(Grunts)
SOLDIER: Allez! Avance!
You had visitors today, Cousin?
Miners from the village petitioning my husband
about the use of a meeting house on our land.
GEOFFREY: Let 'em have it, I say.
Hark 'ee, Elizabeth, after all
'tis actually the child's land, or will be.
- Surprised Elizabeth was that civil.
- They were careful not to tell her their names.
Or their connection to Ross.
Have you always been a fiend for prayer?
Nay, Mistress Paynter.
I did live without God in the gal! of bitterness
and the bond of iniquity for upward of 20 year.
Though God did pardon my sins
and set my soul at liberty.
Now Sam has found salvation
stronger than the rest of us.
Sister, I've a favour to ask 'ee.
- Yes?
- Will 'ee teach me to read?
ELIZABETH: Were you stern?
Fair. I sent out a clear message.
Where the crime is severe, expect no mercy.
And I had several compliments on my robes.
While you were away, we had visitors.
- Some Methodists.
- Methodists?
Zacky Martin and another man
asking after the Grambler Meeting House.
These religious sects make me uneasy.
They're seed beds for revolution.
- They insist Francis promised them the land.
- But did he?
I doubt Zaclq Martin would lie.
- And the other man?
- Seemed genurne.
I think Zacky called him Sam.
Came?
Samuel Came?
Demelza's brother.
So...now you see the plan.
Ross sends his brother-in-law to take advantage
as soon as my back is turned,
to encroach upon our lives yet again.
- I cannot believe he would presume...
- And yet he has, once again.
- How_dare he?
- So we're In agreement?
They must on no account be allowed the land?
On no account.
(Gulls crying)
SOLDIER: Allez!
Avance!
CAROLINE:
George was adamant, quite certain of it.
His name was not on any lists.
Well, Ross is not yet returned.
I hope for all our sakes
he is now aboard a ship bound for home.
THOLLY: Good riddance to France, I say.
I've never been so glad to see
the back of that godforsaken cesspit.
Would have been more than
our lIves are worth to have stayed.
What 'ee did,
keep your head down and your mouth shut,
'twas what any sensible man would do.
Indeed.
Get word to my wife I've been delayed.
(Whispers) Ross.
Ross.
(Retreating footsteps)
(Panﬁng)
(Dog barks in distance)
MAN: Cherchez partout!
"Young Cap'n Ross d'most sincerely regret..."
Oh, he'll regret ever sending home his hat,
for it won't fit his head when I'm done with him.
- 'Tain't right.
- 'Tisn't fit.
- 'Tain't fair.
- 'TaIn't proper.
- A child to raise and another on the way.
- A farm to run and a mine beside.
Oh! How the men folk have t_he_cheek
to expect us to do theIr bIddIng.
Luclq we never do.
- I'm still livid at Ross's insolence._
- I too, to encourage such presumptIon.
Encourage? He surely planned it,
to cause disruption to us yet again.
Dear God! Are we never to be rid of him?
Not here, perhaps, but elsewhere.
If we removed to our town house in Truro,
we'd be out of his immediate vicinity.
Of course, we'd take Valentine with us.
And Geoffrey Charles?
He could remain with Morwenna and your aunt.
I'll miss him, of course, but...
...the thought of being out of Ross's reach...
Then, shall we leave today?
The sooner, the better.
S-S-Sa. ..
Sam.
Dee-me...
De...
Demelza.
He said yes?
He said we must put down our tools
and set no foot there again on pain of death.
Why? What would it cost him?
How could it hurt him to...?
No, of course,
he must know that you're my brothers.
Judas! Must it always be such a battle?
Shake my hand, Geoffrey Charles.
That's what young gentlemen do.
Remember, Morwenna,
- keep him at his studies.
- Of course.
- And don't let him waste his time at cards.
- I wouldn't dream of it.
I'll miss you, Mama.
AUNT AGATHA:
Now we can have some fun. (Cackles)
Voleur!
(Shouting in French)
I see why Father was loath to part with 'ee.
You carry the world on your shoulders
and ne'er stoop 'neath the weight.
At present, 'tis more than I wish to bear.
Ross is no help, he's a law unto himself.
Sometimes, I d'wonder why I wed him.
And yet, sister,
is all love not tricksical sometimes?
I promised to love, honour and obey him.
And why should l...?
What, sister?
What is it?
I know where you can worship.
SAM:
Cap'n Ross would gift we this store house?
Nay, brother, 'tis I do gift you this store house.
- Clean it out, fill it up, it is yours.
DRAKE: Brother Ross won't like it.
No more than I like certain antics of his.
And what's his is mine.
So take it and make it your church.
GEORGE: Well, my clear,
is the house to your liking?
ELIZABETH: Perfectly so.
I realise how long
I've been stultifying in the countryside.
I feel I can breathe again.
And since we're in town sooner than planned,
perhaps you'd care to join me
on my next appearance in court.
I shall endeavour to make it
as entertaInIng as the ﬁrst.
Now, this we will set in writing.
I want no misunderstanding of the law this time.
Water!
MAN: Allez!
They told me you had left.
I came to see if it were true.
- Have you the list?
- Have you the guineas?
- I've given you guineas. Show me the list.
- Monsieur, our agreement...
- When I have a list, you will have your fee.
- Have a care.
We are attracting attention.
- Give me the list.
- I must not be seen here.
WOMAN: Well, monsieur, did you miss me?
Is that why you came back?
We could have been such good friends.
I was unmannerly before, mademoiselle.
You made a generous offer.
I did not appreciate my good fortune.
Perhaps it is not too late.
You're very kind, ma'am...
...but I fear it is.
GUARD: Arretz cet homme! Attention!
(Man shouts in French)
(Clears throat)
From Lord Godolphin.
- An invitation to a banquet.
- How splendid.
Ah.
Apparently his young nephew Anthony
is to come before the court tomorrow...
...on a charge of assaulting a servant girl.
Oh.
- So, we are in agreement?
- Yes.
(Whispering)
Yes. Mm.
We see before the court today a person
who has been wronged in the grossest manner.
Lies have been told.
A blameless reputation is at stake.
In our view, what is required here
is to set an example
in order to deter other persons
from committing a like of fence.
Polly Tregaskis,
the court considers you have committed perjury
and slandered the good name of
Anthony Godolphin.
- (Gasps of shock)
- You'll be committed for trial at the next assizes.
(Chatter and sobbing)
WOMAN: Justice prevailed.
(Polly sobs)
CAROLINE: Everything points to
a
sorry end.
After all this time,
I cannot think that any news will be good.
Nor I, from what I've learned from Tholly
of conditions in France...
I think we must both prepare for the worst.
This helpful little tincture
calms the nerves and fortifies the constitution.
Three drops as and when required.
(Laughter)
(Giggles) Come!
Go on.
Go on, I dare you.
- (Giggles)
- No.
Dare me something else, Miss Morwenna.
Dare me something worth daring.
- Such as?
- Dare me...
I don't know.
Dare me to kiss ye.
But, then, I'd never presume so far,
knowing t'would not be fitting.
No.
It would not.
(Geoffrey giggles)
GEOFFREY: Wahey!
Not with Geoffrey Charles here.
(Horse whinnying)
(Approaching hooves thudding)
(Coughing)
- (Man cries out)
GUARD: Allez!
Vous avez entendu!
(Man cries out)
(Shouting in French)
(Mutters angrily)
Porquoi tu es venu en France?
- Oh, Ross! He's alive.
- For what that's worth.
If you knew what conditions are like
in France for enemies of the Republic...
GUARD: Avance!
Allez!
En joue!
- Feu!
- (Gunshots)
You must go to Caroline,
put her out of her misery.
DWIGHT: Bring him here!
_ - What is_ his name? _
- ArmItage, SIr. LIeutenant ArmItage.
- From HMS Espion.
- Bring me water, quickly.
Lieutenant Armitage!
Can you hear me, sir?
Is there water? I need water!
(Man coughing)
(SObs)
GEORGE: Archie Godolphin was very affable.
Was he?
Invited me to dispense with
the formality of "Lord Godolphin".
Conveyed his appreciation
at my astute judgement
and sensitive handling of the case...
And reminded me of our invitation to his
banquet next Thursday at Godolphin House.
I suspect it won't be long
before we have a burgess in the family.
At the very least.
Oh, Jesus
Ride on till all are subdued
Thy mercy make known
And sprinkle Thy blood
Display Thy salvation
And teach the new song
To every nation
And people and tongue
Oh, Jesus, ride on
Till all are subdued
Thy mercy make known
And sprinkle Thy blood
Display Thy salvation
- You could do worse than Rosie Nanfan.
I believe 'ee, brother.
Shall 'ee speak to her father?
'Twould be to no purpose, brother.
My heart's already bespoke.
ROSS: The old storehouse?
- By whose permission?
- By mine, Ross. Who else would say so?
You would take such a decision
WIthout consultIng me?
- You seriously ask me that?
- I seriously ask it, yes.
Who am I, Ross?
My wife.
And when you're away, who do I refer to?
Do I wait for you to return
and fill the void you've left behind?
Or do I step into it?
Live my life as if you be not in it?
I've a child to support, another on the way,
a farm to run and a mine beside.
Other women may bow and scrape
and ask permission, as I once did.
Butnolongen
For all I knew, you were never coming back...
...then I'd be head of the family.
But I have come back.
You're right.
I have no business questioning
what you did in my absence.
You're my wife, not my chattel.
France is a desperate place...
...and there were times
when I doubted whether I'd come back alive.
And now that I have...
...I'm not about to quibble
with the conditions of my return.
Well, perhaps if you behave well...
...they may be warmer than you deserve.
(Coughing)
(Man shivering)
ARMITAGE: What is this place?
Am l...?
Am I dead?
- Is this Hell?
- (Gunshots)
You're alive, my friend...
...but you'll wish you were not.
We're all in Hell now.
(Distant booming)
GEORGE: A most satisfactory day.
Do you not think?
George, let him lie.
He must not constantly be fussed over.
Oh, must he not?
My boy must not be fussed over.
On the contrary.
He must be cherished, exulted.
(Chuckles)
He is, after all, my son and heir
and all I now do is for his benefit.
So, yes, a most pleasing day.
And all in all, I think we may say
we are exactly where we wish to be.
(Thunder rumbles)
No doubt you were plagued by French beauties.
No doubt I was.
No doubt you availed yourself.
No doubt I did...
...for I have no beauty at home to compare.
Have I?